## Clustering Approaches for Financial Data Analysis: a Survey

Fan Cai, Nhien-An Le-Khac, M-Tahar Kechadi,

School of Computer Science &amp; Informatics, University College Dublin, Ireland

Abstract -Nowadays,  financial  data  analysis  is  becoming increasingly  important  in  the  business  market.  As  companies collect more and more data from daily operations, they expect to extract useful knowledge from existing collected data to help make reasonable decisions for new customer requests, e.g. user credit  category,  confidence  of  expected  return,  etc.  Banking and  financial  institutes  have  applied  different  data  mining techniques  to  enhance  their  business  performance.  Among these techniques, clustering has been considered as a significant method  to  capture  the  natural  structure  of  data.  However, there are  not  many  studies  on  clustering  approaches  for financial  data  analysis.  In  this  paper,  we  evaluate  different clustering algorithms for analysing different financial datasets varied  from  time  series  to  transactions.  We  also  discuss  the advantages and disadvantages of each method to enhance the understanding of inner structure of financial datasets as well as the capability of each clustering method in this context.

Keywords-clustering;  partitioning  clustering;  density-based clustering; financial datasets

## I. INTRODUCTION

ODAY, we have a deluge of financial datasets. Faster and  cheaper  storage technology  allows us to store ever-greater  amounts  of  data.  Due  to  the  large  sizes  of  the data sources it is not possible for a human analyst to come up with interesting information (or patterns) that will help in the decision making process. Global competitions, dynamic markets,  and  rapid  development  in  the  information  and communication technologies are some of the major challenges in today's financial industry. For instance, financial  institutions  are  in  constant  needs  for  more  data analysis,  which  is  becoming  more very large and complex. As the amount of data available is constantly increasing, our ability  to  process  it  becomes  more  and  more  difficult. Efficient discovery of useful knowledge from these datasets is  therefore  becoming  a  challenge  and a  massive  economic need. T

On  the  other  hand,  data  mining  (DM)  is  the  process  of extracting  useful,  often  previously  unknown  information, so-called knowledge, from large datasets (databases or data). This mined knowledge can be used for various applications such as market analysis, fraud detection, customer retention, etc.  Recently,  DM  has  proven  to  be  very  effective  and

N-A. Le-Khac: School of Computer Science &amp; Informatics, University College Dublin, Ireland ( Corresponding author : an.lekhac@lucd.ie).

F. Cai: School of Computer Science &amp; Informatics, University College Dublin, Ireland (caifan.home@gmail.com).

M-T. Kechadi: School of Computer Science &amp; Informatics, University College Dublin, Ireland (tahar.kechadi@ucd.ie).

profitable in analysing financial datasets [1].  However, mining financial data presents special challenges; complexity,  external  factors,  confidentiality,  heterogeneity, and  size.  The  data  miners'  challenge  is  to  find  the  trends quickly while they are valid, as well as to recognize the time when the trends are no longer effective. Moreover, designing an  appropriate  process  for  discovering  valuable  knowledge in financial data is a very complex task.

Different  DM  techniques  have  been  proposed  in  the literature for data analysing in various financial applications. For instance, decision-tree [2] and first-order learning [3] are used  in  stock  selection.  Neural  networks  [4]  and  support vector machine [5] techniques were used to predict bankruptcy,  nearest-neighbours  classification [6] for the fraud  detection.  Users  also  have  used  these  techniques  for analysing financial time series [7], imputed financial data [8], outlier  detection  [9],  etc.  However,  there  are  not  many clustering  techniques  applied  in  this  domain  compared  to other techniques such as classification and regression [2].

In this paper, we survey different clustering algorithms for analysing different financial datasets for a variety of applications; credit cards fraud detection, investment transactions,  stock  market,  etc.  We  discuss  the  advantages and  disadvantages  of  each  method  in  relation  to  better understanding of inner structure of financial datasets as well as the capability of each clustering method in this context. In other  words,  the  purpose  of  this  research  is  to  provide  an overview of how basic clustering methods were applied on financial data analysis.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Section II, we present briefly different financial data mining techniques that  can  be  found  in  the  literature.  Section  III  describes briefly  different  clustering  techniques  used  in  this  domain. We evaluate and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of these clustering methods in Section IV. We conclude and discuss some future directions in Section V.

## II. DATA MINING IN FINANCE

## A. Association Rules

Association Rule is a DM technique known as association analysis, which is useful for discovering interesting relationships  hidden  in  large  datasets.  These  relationships can be represented in the form of association rules or sets of frequent  itemsets  [2].  This  technique  can  be  applied  to analyse  data  in  different  domains  such  as  finance,  earth science, bioinformatics, medical diagnosis, web mining, and scientific computation.

In  finance,  association  analysis  is  used  for  instance  in customer  profiling  that  builds  profiles  of  different  groups from the company's existing customer database. The information obtained from this process can help understanding business performance, making new marketing initiatives,  analysing  risks,  and  revising  company  customer policies. Moreover, loan payment prediction, customer credit policy analysis, marketing  and  customer  care can also perform  association  analysis  to  identify  important  factors and eliminate irrelevant ones.

## B. Classification

Classification  is  another  DM  approach,  which  assigns objects to one of the predefined categories. It uses training examples, such as pairs of input and output targets, to find an  appropriate  target  function  also  known  informally  as  a classification  model.  The  classification  model  is  useful  for both  descriptive  and  predictive  modelling  [2].  In  finance, classification approaches are also used in customer profiling by  building  predictive  models  where  predicted  values  are categorical. Financial market risk, credit scoring/rating, portfolio management, and trading also apply this approach to group similar data together.

Classification  can  be  considered  as  one  of  the  important analytical  methods  in  computational  finance.  Rule-based methods [2][3] can be used for the stock selection. Besides, bankruptcy prediction can use its geometric methods [4][5] where classification  functions  are  represented  with  a  set  of decision boundaries constructed by optimising certain error criteria. Other methods such as Naïve Bayes classifiers [10], maximum  entropy  classifiers  [11]  were  applied  in  bond rating  and  prototype-based  classification  methods  such  as nearest-neighbours classification was moreover used for the fraud detection.

## C. Clustering

Like  classification,  cluster  analysis  groups  similar  data objects  into  clusters  [2],  however,  the  classes  or  clusters were not defined in advance. Normally, clustering analysis is a  useful  starting  point  for  other  purposes  such  as  data summarisation. A cluster of data objects can be considered as a form of data compression. Different domains can apply clustering techniques to analysis data such  as biology, information  retrieval,  medicine,  etc.  In  the  business  and finance,  clustering  can  be  used,  for  instance,  to  segment customers  into  a  number  of  groups  for  additional  analysis and  marketing  activities.  As  clustering  is  normally  used  in data  summarisation  or  compression,  there  are  not  many financial  applications  that  use  this  technique  compared  to classification and association analysis. We will survey some approaches in Section III.

## D. Other methods

Other mining techniques that can be applied for financial datasets are grouped in three categories: optimization, regression and simulation. For instance, portfolio selection, risk  management  and  asset  liability  management  can  use different optimisation techniques such as genetic algorithms

[12],  dynamic  programming  [13],  reinforcement  learning [14], etc. Besides, linear regression [2] and wavelet regression  [15]  are  popular  methods  in  the  domain  of financial forecasting, option pricing and stock prediction.

## III. CLUSTERING METHODS

## A. Partitioning Methods

K-means  clustering  [16] method  aims  to  partition n observed examples into k clusters. Each example belongs to one cluster. All examples are treated with the equal importance and thus a mean is taken as the centroid of the observations  in  the  cluster.  With  the  predetermined k ,  the algorithm proceeds by alternating between two steps: assignment  step  and  update  step.  Assignment  step  assigns each  example  to  its  closest  cluster  (centroid).  Update  step uses the result of assignment step to calculate the new means (centroids) of newly formed clusters. The convergence speed of the k-means algorithm is fast in practice but the optimal k value is not known in advance.

In  [17],  the  author  uses  k-means  algorithm  to  categorise mutual funds. The created clusters are assigned according to self-declared  investment  objectives  and  are  compared  to explain  the  difference  between  expectation  and  financial characteristics. Besides, in order to determine the number of clusters  (k),  the  author  applied  the  Hartigan's  theory  by evaluating the following formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k is  the  result  with  k  clusters  and  ESS  represents the sum of squares and n is the dataset's size. The number of clusters is the minimum k such that (1) is false.

## B. Density-based

Another  clustering  approach  is  density  based  [2]  which does  not  partition  the  sample  space  by  mean  centroid,  but instead density based information is used, by which tangled, irregular contoured  but well distributed dataset can be clustered correctly.

OPTICS [18] is a density based clustering technique to get insight into the density distribution of a dataset. It makes up for  the  weakness  of  the  k-means  algorithm  for  lack  of knowledge of how to choose the value k. OPTICS provides a perspective to look into the size of density-based clusters.

Unlike centroid-based clustering, OPTICS does not produce a clustering of a dataset explicitly from the first step. It instead creates an augmented ordering of examples based on the density distribution. This cluster ordering can be used by a broad range of density-based clustering, such as DBSCAN.  And  besides, OPTICS  can provide density information about the dataset graphically by cluster reachability-plot [18], which makes it possible for the user to understand the density-based structure of dataset.

Figure I. 2-D dataset sample and corresponding reachability plot

<!-- image -->

Figure  I  gives  the  reachability-plot  of  the  2  dimensional dataset and the number of the valleys indicate that there are 3 density-based clusters.

However, OPTICS needs some priori, such as neighbourhood radius ( ε ) and a minimum number of objects (MinPts)  within ε , by  which  directly  density-reachable, density-connected, cluster and noise are defined as in [18].

DBSCAN [19] is based on density-connected range from arbitrary  core  objects,  which  contains  MinPts  objects  in ε -neighbourhood.  In  OPTICS,  cluster  membership  is  not recorded  from  the  start,  but  instead  the  order  in  which objects get clustered are stored. This information consists of two  values: core-distance and reachability-distance. For more details on DBSCAN and OPTICS ordered dataset are provided in [18].

Core-distance of an object p is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Reachability-distance  of  an  object  q  w.r.t  object  o  is defined as:

max( core -dis tan ce ( o ), dis tan ce ( o , q )), otherwise reachability -dis tan ce ε , MinPts ( q , o ) = Undefined , if neighbor ε ( o ) &lt; MinPts " # $ % $

Since reachability plot is insensitive to the input parameters, [18] suggests that the values should be 'large' enough to  yield  a  good  result  with  no  undefined  examples and  reachability-plot  looks  not  jagged.  Experiments  show that MinPts uses values between 10 and 20 always get good results  with  large  enough ε .  Briefly,  reachability-plot  is  a very intuitive means to get the understanding of the density-based structure of financial data. Its general shape is independent of the parameters used.

## C. Data stream clustering

[9] applied an on-line evolving approach for detecting of financial statements' anomalies. The on-line evolving method  [20]  is  a  dynamic  technique  for  clustering  data stream.  This  method  dynamically  increases  the  number  of clusters  by  calculating  the  distance  between  examples  and existing  cluster  centres.  If  this  distance  is  higher  than  a threshold  value,  a  new  cluster  is  created  and  initialized  by the example. This clustering algorithm can be summarised in three main steps:

- (1) Calculate the distance DiJ between data object xi to all existing  cluster  centres CcJ ,  find  the  minimum  distance Dik and compare it to the radius Rk of cluster Ck .
- (2) If Dik &lt; Rk then xi belongs to cluster Ck ,  else  find the nearest  cluster Ca and  evaluate Sa=  Dia  +  Ra against  a threshold δ .
- (3) If Sa &gt; δ then create a new cluster for xi else xi belongs to cluster Ca and update Ra = Sa/2 .

In this algorithm, the number of clusters is not predefined. However,  the  distance  calculation  and  the  threshold  value needs expert to provide prior knowledge and so does label of newly formed cluster.

[21]  applied  a  hierarchical  agglomerative  clustering  [2] approach to analyse stock market data. The authors proposed an  efficient  metric  for  measuring  the  similarity  between clusters; a key issue for hierarchical agglomerative clustering methods. This similarity between two clusters C = {C1, C2,…Ck} and C' = {C'1, C'2…C'k} is defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  authors  also  mentioned  that  some  pre-processing techniques  such  as  mapping,  dimensionality  reduction  and normalisation should also be applied to improve the performance. Moreover, they used Precision-Recall method [21] to increase the cluster quality.

[7]  also  applied  [21]'s  approach  for  analysing  financial data  i.e.  stock  market.  Besides,  the  authors  defined  a  new distance metric based on the time period to cope with time series  data.  Concretely,  the  distance  between  stock  i  and stock j is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

si (t) is  the  stock value i at  time t .  The authors stated that hierarchical agglomerative clustering fed by normalised percentage change after filtering outliers gives the best result. However the identification of outliers needs a priori threshold.  Moreover,  the  authors  combine  neural  networks and  association  analysis  with  the  clustering  technique  to analyse stock market datasets.

## A. Datasets

Different  financial  datasets  have  been  discussed  in  this section.  Some  of  the Ri , j = S i + S j Mi , j were  selected  by  the authors'  approaches.  For  instance,  [17]  used  data  obtained from Morningstar including 904 different funds classified in seven  different  investment  objectives:  World  Wide  Bonds, Growth,  SMEs,  Municipal  NY,  Municipal  CA,  Municipal State  and  Municipal  National.  Each  fund  has  28  financial variables and all are normalised before analysis. Meanwhile, [9] used synthesis datasets with 1000 documents containing financial  statements.  In  [21]  the  authors  used  Standard  and Poor 500 index historical stock dataset. There are 500 stocks with daily price and each stock is a sequence of some length l where l ≤ 252.  In  [7]  they  analysed  stock  price  datasets from  91  different stocks, which  can  be  found  at link http://finance.yahoo.com. The data covers three years; from November 1, 1999 to November 1, 2001.

We analyse moreover two financial datasets with k-means and density-based clustering approaches: German credit card and  Churn.  Both  of  these  datasets  are  provided  by  UCI machine  learning  repository  [22].  German  credit  dataset contains  clients  described  by  7  numerical  and  13  nominal attributes to good or bad credit risks. The data contains 1000 sample cases. The Churn dataset is artificial but are claimed to be similar to real-world measurement. It concerns telecommunications churn and contains 5 nominal attributes, 15 numerical attributes and 3333 examples. We analyse the dataset  without  the  help  of  nominal  attributes  for  several reasons, e.g. numerical attributes are taken internally within the commercial activities or business market while nominal attributes are stated by external concepts defined by market experts,  whose  significance  is  not  promised.  Moreover, nominal attributes  are  usually  hierarchically  dependent  and can  be  missing  while  data  mining  models  should  have  the capability to bypass these optional constraints to understand the structure of sample cases.

## B. Criteria

The  criteria  used  to  evaluate  clustering  methods  depend on each approach. For instance, [17] applied a relevant value of  k  by  using  the  formula  (1)  and  then  discuss  on  results obtained from the running of k-means algorithm to classify mutual funds.

[7]  uses  normalised  change Pi(t) of  stock  i  to  overcome the discrete essence of time and difficulties to treat deviations or first difference of prices due to the wide range of  possible  stock  prices.  External  clustering  statics  such  as entropy and purity are used to define the closeness within an industry,  and  internal  statistics  such  as  separation  and  the silhouette  coefficient  to  tell  what  degree  the  industries'  are separate from each other.

[9]  does  not  give  a  clustering  criterion  but  claims  that their  work  is  the  first  step  to  building  robust  financial

## IV. EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS

statements' anomaly detection system but it highly depends on the operator monitoring the process.

In  this  paper,  we  use  well-known  internal  criteria  to evaluate  the  clustering  behaviour.  Davies-Bouldin  Index (DBI) [23] is used as a first internal criterion for clustering, which is defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N is the number of clusters and Di is the tightness criteria of a cluster Ci ,  which takes the worst case scenario and is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  i and j are cluster indexes, Ri , j is  summary evaluation of two clusters of ratio between sum of tightness of two clusters and  looseness between two centres.

S k is  the  average  internal  Euclidean distance of the cluster indexed  by  k,  and Mi , j is  the  Euclidean  distance  between two clusters.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ai is  the  centroid  of  the  cluster Ci , Ti is  the  size of Ci , Xi is an n dimensional feature vector assigned to Ci . The smaller DBI value is, the more efficient clustering is.

Dunn index (DI) is used as a second internal criteria for clustering, which is defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Δ k is various types of size notation of a cluster, it could be farthest two points in side a cluster, mean distance between all pairs or distance of all the points from the mean.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and δ ( Ai , Aj ) is the closest distance between clusters

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Unlike DBI, the larger DI is the better is the clustering. It evaluates the inter-cluster and intra-cluster distances. However,  like  DBI,  the  best  clustering  loses  most  general structural information about the dataset.

The  main  difference  between  DBI  and  DI  is  that  DBI indicates  the  average  tightness  while  DI  is  a  worst-case indicator.

## C. Partitioning Methods

As in [17] group mutual funds with different investment objectives,  they  claimed  that  cluster  analysis  is  able  to explain  non-linear  structural  relationships  among  unknown structural  dataset.  They  found that  over  40%  of  the  mutual funds do not belong to their stated categories, and despite the very large number of categories stated; three groups are very important.  Clustering  helps  simplifying  the  financial  data classification  problem  based  on  their  characteristics  rather than  on  labels,  such  as  nominal  labels  (customer  gender, living  area,  income  or  the  success  of  the  last  transaction, etc.). Besides, nominal labels may  be missing or not provided.  Thus  our  effort  is  to  understand  the  detailed structure  of  financial  data  classification  without  the  given class labels.

We give the DBI and DI of K-Means clustering of both normalised  and  un-normalised  two  datasets  (German  credit dataset and Churn dataset) to figure out what are the optimal k values for given datasets. To avoid information overfitting and loss of generality, we test k from 2 to 20. We normalise the attributes values between [0:1] in order to avoid large-scale attributes dominating the dataset features.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  the xmax and xmin are  the  max  and  min  value  of rescaled attribute.

From Figure  II,  k=12  is  optimal  by  DBI  and  k=8  is  the optimal value by DI for the original German credit dataset, k=8 is  the  optimal  value  for  the  normalised  German  credit dataset by both DBI and DI. From the result, we know that attribute scale affects the clustering evaluation since the DI of  clustering  original  dataset  is  around  0.  Normalisation unifies the results of both average tightness and worst case.

From Figure III, k=12 is optimal by DBI and k=17 by DI for original churn dataset. k=2 is the optimal value by both DBI  and  DI  for  normalised  dataset.  Again,  we  notice  that normalisation  unifies  the  optimal  clustering  scheme  while original attribute scale giving two clustering solutions.

Figure V shows that normalised German credit dataset is well density distributed. When  MinPts=10, by setting reachability-distance equal to 0.33, the dataset is partitioned into 23 density-based clusters and 1 noise cluster. There are 841 valid examples and 159 noise examples. When MinPts = 20, with the same reachability distance, dataset is partitioned into 15 density closed clusters and 1 noise cluster. There are 681 valid examples and 319 noise examples.

Despite  the  visualization  of  density  distribution,  from Table  III,  the  clustering  suffers  from  large  proportion  of noise and larger DBI values and lower DI values compared to K-means clustering. We can conclude that German credit dataset is more suitable for centroid-based clustering rather than density-based clustering.

<!-- image -->

Figure II. DBI and DI of K-means clustering German dataset

Figure III. DBI and DI of K-means clustering churn dataset

<!-- image -->

Figure IV.  Reachability-plot of original German credit dataset

<!-- image -->

Figure V.  Reachability-plot of normalized German dataset

<!-- image -->

Table III. DBSCAN clustering for normalized German credit dataset

|   Reachability distance |   MinPts | Noise   |   DBI |    DI |
|-------------------------|----------|---------|-------|-------|
|                    0.33 |       10 | No      | 2.529 | 0.236 |
|                         |          | Yes     | 2.843 | 0.033 |
|                    0.33 |       20 | No      | 2.465 | 0.25  |
|                         |          | Yes     | 2.793 | 0.02  |

Figure VI shows that original churn dataset cannot partitioned into clusters based on density; the entire dataset behaves as a whole.

Figure VI.  Reachability-plot of original Churn dataset

<!-- image -->

Figure VII.  Reachability-plot of normalized Churn dataset

<!-- image -->

Figure VII shows that there are mainly two valleys when MinPts = 10 or 20, which indicates there are two incentive clusters in the churn dataset.

From  Table  IV,  DBSCAN  without  noise  examples  gets good  DBI  while  getting  poor  DBI  with  noise.  However, DBSCAN clustering suffers from large proportion of noise again, which has over 980 noise examples (around 30 ％ of noise). For financial dataset, noise should be very small and the  data  recorded  should  be  generally  trusted.  Financial datasets  are  not  usually  density  distributed,  and  therefore, density-based clustering is not appropriate.

Table IV. DBSCAN clustering and DBI for Churn dataset

|   Reachability distance |   MinPts | Noise   |   DBI |    DI |
|-------------------------|----------|---------|-------|-------|
|                    0.32 |       10 | No      | 1.596 | 0.182 |
|                         |          | Yes     | 3.568 | 0.106 |
|                    0.33 |       20 | No      | 1.572 | 0.195 |
|                         |          | Yes     | 4.435 | 0.08  |

## D. Data stream clustering

In  [9]  the  authors  use  an  on-line  evolving  clustering  to update  the  parameters:  cluster  number  and  cluster  radius. Two  levels  of  anomalies  detection  have  different  financial statement  features. The  first level is based  on  internal information related to the account, e.g. equipment, employee, etc.  For  every  combination  of  the  two  parameters,  at  least one  cluster  is  created.  But  the  authors  do  not  give  a  good reason for it.  The  second  level  is  based  on  document  type. However the distances  among  different  types  are  different, which  is  a  prior  knowledge  from  expert  as  well.  The threshold values for creating new clusters are determined by the experts for the first level and pre-defined distance for the second level. The monitoring process involves experts heavily to approve or disapprove the documents as well. The authors categorise their method as the first step to anomalies detection.  They  are  committed  to  reduce  the  reliance  on experts and combine off-line and on-line approaches in the future work.

In [7] the authors use hierarchical agglomerative clustering for the time-based normalised stock market data. Percentage  change  is  chosen  to  be  a  good  comparative measure and time-based normalisation is used to remove the overall  trend  of  stock  market  and  improve  the  accuracy caused  by  outliers.  The  approach  removes  all  items  as outliers  if  the  average  normalised  distance  across  all  the items exceeds a specified threshold, which requires domain expert  knowledge.  Moreover,  the  degree  of  correlation  of time-series is decided in advance. The authors found complete link and Ward's Method performs reasonably well by  better  purity  and  filtering  out  fewer  outlier  stocks.  By treating  the  outlier,  the  overall  purity  decrease  only  about 6%,  the  author  claims  time-series  clustering  can  determine the industry classification given the historical price record of a stock.

However, we notice that data stream clustering needs too much  prior  or  domain  knowledge  and  a  lot  of  tuning  for different features of even a single domain. Clustering approaches of different fields are different in essence. Thus clustering  is  a  good  method  to  understand  the  financial time-series classification but not logically clear and efficient. Distance measure becomes even more complex due to time related nature because clustering does not have the capability to scale time related influence intelligently between  examples.  Experts  have  to  determine  that  instead, e.g. length of periodicity, etc. Recurrent neural networks [24] and  Gaussian  Process  [25]  are  more  promising  approaches and  are  more  likely  to  handle  time-series  or  periodical financial data classification.

## V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We  show  that  density-based  clustering  does  not  suit financial dataset. Normalised centroid-based clustering with higher DI or lower DBI gives the best number of clusters to help  understanding  financial  data  classification.  Original attribute scales do not reflect the behaviour similarity since Euclidean  distance  is  dominated  by  large  scaled  attributes, best  average  tightness  does  not  indicate  the  best  case  by departing  the  worst  case.  However,  we  still  find  some constrains,  e.g.,  K-means  clustering  tends  to  find  spherical clusters, centroid-based clustering does not handle the noise, etc.

This  work  can  be  seen  as  the  first  step  to  look  into  the structure of financial dataset by using clustering. We would further  apply  other  techniques  on  financial  datasets.  This includes: (1) discover other centroid-based clustering approaches for financial datasets. (2) Find if nominal attributes are significant and  introduce  other  criteria to evaluate the clusters. (3)  Introduce  weighted  Euclidean distance instead of standard Euclidean distance to re-evaluate centroid-based clusters, as to  overcome  the limitations of K-means. (4) Introduce and compare different kinds  of  nonlinear  classifiers  to  strengthen  the  recall  and accuracy  and  improve  prediction,  interpretability  of the results.  These  techniques  include  decision  tree,  nonlinear SVMs, different structures of neural networks and Gaussian processes with different kernel functions, etc.

## REFERENCES

- [1] A. Weigend, 'Data Mining in Finance: Report from the Post-NNCM-96 Workshop on Teaching Computer Intensive Methods for  Financial  Modeling  and  Data  Analysis', Fourth  International Conference  on  Neural  Networks  in  the  Capital  Markets  NNCM-96 , 1997, pp. 399-411.
- [2] P-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar, Introduction to Data Mining , Addison Wesley, 2006, pp.150-172
- [3] J. R. Quinlan, 'Learning First-Order Definitions of Functions', Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. , vol. 5, 1996, pp. 139-161
- [4] N. Cristianini, J-S. Taylor, An  Introduction to Support Vector Machines  and  Other  Kernel-based  Learning  Methods. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
- [5] J.  Han  and  M.  Kamber, Data  Mining:  Concept  and  Techniques . Morgan Kaufmann publishers, 2 nd Eds., Nov. 2005.
- [6] T.  M.  Cover,  P.  E.  Hart,  'Nearest  Neighbor  Pattern  Classification', Journal of Knowledge Based Systems , vol. 8 no.6, 1995, pp. 373-389
- [7] T. Wittman. (2002, December). Time-Series Clustering and Association Analysis of Financial Data. Available: http:// www.math.ucla.edu/~wittman/thesis/project.pdf.
- [8] H. Bensmail, R. P. DeGennaro. (2004, September). Analyzing Imputed  Financial  Data:  A  New  Approach  to  Cluster  Analysis. Available: http:// www.frbatlanta.org/filelegacydocs/wp0420.pdf.
- [9] S.  Omanovic, Z. Avdagic, S. Konjicija, 'On-line evolving clustering for financial statements' anomalies detection', International
10. Symposium on Information, Communication and Automation Technologies, ICAT 2009. XXII , 2009, pp. 1-4.
- [10] P. Langley, W.  Iba, K. Thompson,  'An  analysis of Bayesian classifiers', 10 th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1992, pp. 223-228.
- [11] R. A. Bourne, S. Parsons, 'Maximum Entropy and Variable Strength Defaults', 16 th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 99 , Stockholm, Sweden, July 31 - August 6, 1992, pp.50-55
- [12] N-A.  Le-Khac,  M.  T.  Kechadi  'Application  of  Data  Mining  for Anti-money Laundering Detection: A Case Study'. 10th  IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops , Sydney, Australia, 14 December 2010. pp.577-584
- [13] S. R. Eddy, 'What is dynamic programming?', Nature Biotechnology , vol. 22, 2004, pp.909-910.
- [14] R. S. Sutton, "Learning  to predict  by  the  method  of  temporal differences". Machine Learning , vol. 3, 1988. pp.9-44
- [15] H. Wenying, 'Wavelet Regression With an Emphassis on Singularity Detection,' M.S. thesis, Dept. Mathematics  and Statistics,  Sam Houston State Univ., Texas, USA, 2003
- [16] J.A. Hartigan, 'Clustering Algorithms', Wiley 1975
- [17] A. Marathe A, HA. Shawky ,' Categorizing mutual funds using clusters', Advances in Quantitative Analysis of Finance and Accounting , vol. 7, 1999, pp.199-211.
- [18] M.  Ankerst,  M.  M.  Breunig,  H-P.  Kriegel,  J.  Sander  "OPTICS: Ordering Points To Identify the Clustering Structure ". ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data' , 1999. pp. 49-60.
- [19] M. Ester, H-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, "A density-based algorithm for  discovering  clusters  in  large  spatial  databases  with  noise"  2 nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-96) . 1996. pp. 226-231
- [20] N. Kasabov, 'Evolving connectionist systems' , Springer-Verlag London Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 40-42.
- [21] M.  Gavrilov,  D.  Anguelov,  P.  Indyk,  and  R.  Motwani.  'Mining  the Stock  Market:  Which  Measure  is  Best?' Proc. of the KDD 2000 ,  p. 487-496.
- [22] Professor Dr. Hans Hofmann, Statlog (German Credit Data) Data Set, C.  L.  Blake  and  C.  J.  Merz,  Churn  Data  Set,  UCI  Repository  of Machine Learning Databases
- [23] Davies, D. L.; Bouldin, D. W. (1979). "A Cluster Separation Measure". IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2): 224.
- [24] Martin T. Hagan, H. B. D., and Mark Beale. Neural network design. Boston, MA, USA, PWS Publishing Co. 1996
- [25] MacKay, D. J. C. "Gaussian Processes -A Replacement for Supervised Neural Networks?". 1997